                         TABLE OF CONTENTS


                              INDEX


Chapter No.                   Title                Page No.
              PREAMBLE                                1
              VISION OF THE NATIONAL SKILL            3
              DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE IN INDIA
Chapter 1     THE MISSION STATEMENT, AIMS AND         8
              OBJECTIVES
Chapter 2     GOVERNANCE OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT        10
              INITIATIVE
Chapter 3     EXPANSION OF OUTREACH, EQUITY &        14
              ACCESS
Chapter 4     QUALITY AND RELEVANCE                  23
Chapter 5     SKILL    DEVELOPMENT    FOR    THE     28
              UNORGANISED SECTOR
Chapter 6     BENCHMARKING OF SKILL DEFICIT AND      31
              PLAN TO ACHIEVE TARGET BY 2022
Chapter 7     FINANCING SKILL DEVELOPMENT            45
Chapter 8     RESPONDING TO THE FUTURE               46




                                                     Page 0
                                        PREAMBLE
P1) Skills and knowledge are the driving forces of economic growth and social
development for any country. Countries with higher and better levels of skills adjust more
effectively to the challenges and opportunities of world of work.


P2) Potentially, the target group for skill development comprises all those in the labour
force, including those entering the labour market for the first time (12.8 million annually),
those employed in the organized sector (26.0 million) and those working in the unorganized
sector (433 million) in 2004-05. The current capacity of the skill development programs is
3.1 million. India has set a target of skilling 500 million people by 2022.


P3) As the proportion of working age group of 15-59 years will be increasing steadily,
India has the advantage of „demographic dividend‟. Harnessing the demographic dividend
through appropriate skill development efforts would provide an opportunity to achieve
inclusion and productivity within the country and also a reduction in the global skill
shortages. Large scale skill development is thus an imminent imperative.


P4) Major challenge of skill development initiatives is also to address the needs of huge
population by providing skills in order to make them employable and help them secure
„decent work.‟ Skill development for persons working in the unorganized sector is a key
strategy in that direction. This will also inculcate dignity of labour and create greater
awareness towards environmental, safety and health concerns.


P5) Planned development of skills must be underpinned by a „policy‟, which is both
comprehensive as well as national in character. A national policy response is, therefore,
needed to guide the skill development strategies and coordinated action by all stake holders
to avoid a piecemeal approach. It is also important that the policies of skill development be
linked to policies in the economic, employment and social development arenas.

                                                                                  Page 1
P6) The country is poised at a moment in history when a much brighter future for its entire
people is within its reach. Skill development will help actualize this potential. Development
and articulation of a national policy on skill development is a matter of priority.
A task of skill development has many challenges which include:-
  a) Increasing capacity & capability of existing system to ensure equitable access to all.
  b) Promoting life long learning, maintaining quality and relevance, according to
      changing requirement particularly of emerging knowledge economy.
  c) Creating effective convergence between school education, various skill development
      efforts of government and between government and Private Sector initiative.
  d) Capacity building of institutions for planning, quality assurance and involvement of
      stake holders.
  e) Creating institutional mechanism for research development quality assurance,
      examinations & certification, affiliations and accreditation.
  f) Increasing participation of stakeholders, mobilizing adequate investment for
      financing skill development, attaining sustainability by strengthening physical and
      intellectual resources.




                                                                                      Page 2
       Vision for the National Skill Development Initiative in India

V1) Scale of ambition: At present the capacity of skill development in India is around
3.1 million persons per year. The 11th Five Year Plan envisions an increase in that
capacity to 15 million annually. India has target of creating 500 million skilled workers
by 2022. Thus, there is a need for increasing capacity and capability of skill
development programs.


V2) High inclusivity: The skill development initiatives will harness inclusivity and
reduce divisions such as male/female, rural/urban, organized/unorganized employment
and traditional/contemporary workplace.


V3) Dynamic and demand-based system planning: The skill development initiatives
support the supply of trained workers who are adjustable dynamically to the changing
demands of employment and technologies. This policy will promote excellence and will
meet the requirements of knowledge economy.


V4) Choice, competition and accountability: The skill development initiative does
not discriminate between private or public delivery and places importance on outcomes,
users‟ choice and competition among training providers and their accountability.


V5) Policy coordination and coherence: The skill development initiatives support
employment generation, economic growth and social development processes. Skill
development policy will be an integral part of comprehensive economic, labour and
social policies and programmes. A framework for better coordination among various
Ministries, States, industry and other stakeholders will be established.



                                                                              Page 3
(S) The following operational strategies will be adopted:


(S1) Folding the future in: If we start from our current position, we are likely to extrapolate.
Folding the future in allows us to innovate. Innovation is, therefore, an important element of
the strategy.
(S2) Skills framework must move to a system of equivalence to diplomas and degrees:
National Vocational Qualification Framework (NVQF) will be created with an open/flexible
system which will permit individuals to accumulate their knowledge and skills, and convert
them through testing and certification into higher diplomas and degrees. NVQF will provide
quality assured various learning pathways having standards, comparable with any international
qualification framework. NVQF will support lifelong learning, continuous upgradation of skills
and knowledge.


(S3) Skills must be bankable: The process of skill acquisition especially for the poor and
needy persons will be made bankable. The effort would be to complement public investment
with institutional/ bank finance.


(S4) Co-created solutions and forging partnerships: We have to accept a very asymmetric
India as a starting point. Partnerships will be consciously promoted between Government,
industry, local governments, civil society institutions and all potential skill providers.
Institutional mechanism and standing platforms will be created to ensure sustainability.


(S5) Game-changing delivery/innovation: Availability of public institutions above the high
school level, after class hours for skill development by the Private Sector, without disturbing
the normal working, will be explored. Necessary regulations would be brought in by the local
management authority of the particular educational institution.


CORE OPERATING PRINCIPLES


                                                                                  Page 4
C1) Government financial support must complement private investment: The Central
Ministries must focus on areas where private investment in skilled development is unlikely to
be available or forthcoming. The Government would aim at useful public-private partnerships.


C2) States as key actors: The States being the key actors in Skill Development would set up
overarching integrated framework for action for Skill Development through State level Skill
Development Missions.


C3) Deployment of funds: The funds would be deployed more for activities than for buildings
and other hard assets. However, upgradation of machinery and equipment, teaching and
learning aids will be a continuous process. Creation of infrastructure in latest technology, need-
based new initiatives, creation of infrastructure in rural, remote and difficult areas will
continue.


C4) Focus of modular courses, open architecture and short term courses: With fast
changing skills in the labour market, focus would be on short, relevant and effective courses
that would get candidates into the workplace. They will be welded through NVQF to maintain
dynamism and open to feedback.


C5) Separate financing from delivery: Today Government funds are only available for
government delivery. National Skill Development Corporation will support private skill
development initiatives. Following financing options will be explored:
       a) Link financing to outcomes: Today public and private training is financed largely
       on inputs viz. number of courses, number of students, faculty, etc. Efforts would be
       made to move towards Government financing linked to placement ratios and outcomes.


       b) Focus funding on candidates: The focus would be on funding the candidates rather


                                                                                   Page 5
       than institutions to create choice. This could be structured as a scholarship, skill
       voucher, outcome based reimbursement, etc.


C6) Create infrastructure for on-the-job-training and encourage apprenticeships: The
enabling infrastructure for large number of formal apprentices needs to be built that includes
modification to the Apprentices Act, 1961.


C7) Publicise rating and outcome information on training institutions: A framework of
accreditation and infrastructure for information dissemination around measurable criteria on
institutions will be created. Ratings of public and private institutions would be put on public
domain.


C8) Effective assessment and credible certification: Quality assured learning, credible
assessment and certification will be developed. This will allow employers to use the certificate
as a proxy to fast track job applicants.


C9) Restructure employment exchanges as career guidance centres: Employment
Exchanges will be restructured as career guidance centres to channelize candidates into jobs,
apprenticeships and training.


C10) Expand formal employment: Formal employment is not only fiscally attractive but
more amenable to financing innovations. This will require a review of existing State and
Central legislations which encourage informal and unorganized employment.




APPROACH TO DELIVERABLES:


 D1)      Diversity of skills: There is a need to identify, catalog and project the range and depth


                                                                                    Page 6
 of skills e.g. traditional, industrial-era and post-industrial era skills to understand and present
 the vast array of skills that individuals can choose from.
 D2) Talent pool: The ultimate measure is the “500 Million” skilled people. Skill inventory
 along with its various levels and grades will be created.
  D3) Employment outcomes Skill training must ensure a job for those who seek it. The
placement ratio will be monitored and placed in the public domain by agencies involved in
skill training.




                                                                                     Page 7
                                         CHAPTER 1


                 THE MISSION STATEMENT, AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

1.1 Mission: The policy envisions the establishment of a National Skill Development
Initiative with the following mission:
National Skill Development Initiative will empower all individuals through improved
skills, knowledge, nationally and internationally recognized qualifications to gain access
to decent employment and ensure India’s competitiveness in the global market.


1.2        Aims: The aim of skill development in the country is to support achieving rapid and
inclusive growth through:
a)         Enhancing individuals‟ employability (wage/ self employment) and ability to adapt
           to changing technologies and labour market demands.
b)         Improving productivity and living standards of the people.
c)         Strengthening competitiveness of the country.
d)         Attracting investment in skill development.


1.3        Objectives of National Policy on Skill Development:


The objectives of the national policy on skill development are to:
      a)      Create opportunities for all to acquire skills throughout life, and especially for
              youth, women and disadvantaged groups.
      b)      Promote commitment by all stakeholders to own skill development initiatives.
      c)      Develop a high-quality skilled workforce/entrepreneur relevant to current and
              emerging employment market needs.
      d)      Enable the establishment of flexible delivery mechanisms that respond to the
              characteristics of a wide range of needs of stakeholders.


                                                                                     Page 8
      e)      Enable effective coordination between different ministries, the Centre and the
              States and public and private providers.


1.4        Scope of the National Skill Development Policy:


The coverage of the National Policy on Skill Development includes the following:
      a)      Institution-based    skill    development      including     ITIs/ITCs/vocational
              schools/technical schools/ polytechnics/ professional colleges, etc.
      b)      Learning initiatives of sectoral skill development organised by different
              ministries/departments.
      c)      Formal and informal apprenticeships and other types of training by enterprises
      d)      Training for self-employment/entrepreneurial development
      e)      Adult learning, retraining of retired or retiring employees and lifelong learning
      f)      Non-formal training including training by civil society organizations
      g)      E-learning, web-based learning and distance learning.




                                                                                      Page 9
                                      CHAPTER 2

             GOVERNANCE OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE

2.1 Institutional Arrangements
2.1.1 Prime Minister’s National Council on Skill Development, under the Chairmanship
of Prime Minister has been set up as an apex institution for policy direction and review.
The Ministers for Human Resource Development, Finance, Industries, Rural Development,
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, Labour and Employment and Micro Small &
Medium Enterprises are members. Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, Chairperson
of the National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council, Chairperson of the National Skill
Development Corporation and 6 experts in the area of skill development are other members.
Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister is the Member Secretary to the Council.


2.1.2 National Skill Development Co-ordination Board:

A National Skill Development Co-ordination Board has been set up under the
Chairmanship of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission. Secretaries of Ministries of
Human Resource Development, Labour and Employment, Rural Development, Housing
and Urban Poverty Alleviation and Finance are members. Chairperson/Chief Executive
Officer of the National Skill Development Corporation, Secretaries of four States by
rotation, for a period of two years, and three distinguished Academicians/Subject Area
Specialists are other members. Secretary, Planning Commission is Member Secretary of
the Board.
2.1.3 National Skill Development Corporation:
    The National Skill Development Corporation is a non-profit company under the
    Companies Act 1956 with an appropriate governance structure.      The head of the




                                                                               Page 10
      Corporation is a person of eminence/reputed professional in the field of Skill
      Development. The Corporation would constitute Sector Skills Councils with
      following functions:

a)      Identification of skill development needs including preparing a catalogue of types of
        skills, range and depth of skills to facilitate individuals to choose from them.
b)      Development of a sector skill development plan and maintain skill inventory.
c)      Determining skills/competency standards and qualifications.
d)      Standardization of affiliation and accreditation process.
e)      Participation in Affiliation, accreditation, examination and certification.
f)      Plan and execute Training of Trainers.
g)      Promotion of academies of excellence.
h)      Establishment of a well structured sector specific Labour Market Information
        System (LMIS) to assist planning and delivery of training.

2.1.4   National Council for Vocational Training: (NCVT)
     NCVT will be strengthened and re-engineered with a broader mandate and
     representation. The main functions include:
     a) Design,development and maintenance of NVQF which inter alia includes:
            i) Setting up a framework for competency standards, structure of courses,
                 credit structure, accumulation and certification.
            ii) Setting up a framework for affiliation and accreditation of institutions.
            iii) Quality control mechanism.
     b) Labour market information system and dissemination of information at the national
        level.
     c) Monitoring and evaluation on the effectiveness and efficiency of national skill
        development efforts through appropriate reporting and communication mechanism.




2.2 Social Partners in Skill Development:

                                                                                      Page 11
 Partnerships will be consciously promoted between Government, industry, trade unions,
 local governments, civil society institutions and all skill providers. It will also include,
 training providers, professional societies, Self Help Groups, Cooperatives and NGOs/civil
 society institutions. Creation of an institutional mechanism and regular consultation with
 stake holders will form the corner stone of Skill Development Initiative.


2.3 Roles and responsibilities of stake holders:

2.3.1 Roles and responsibilities of Government (Central /State or local level)
   a) Setting up priority and policy planning-statistics gathering
   b) Providing regulatory framework and enabling environment for stake holders.
   c) Devising financing mechanism, reward and promotional framework.
   d) Capacity building of social partners.
   e) Setting up of monitoring, evaluation and dissemination of information.
   f) Facilitating international co-operation.
   g) Setting up of a qualification framework and quality assurance mechanism.
   h) Preparation of work plans to meet sector specific skill sets.


2.3.2 Roles and responsibilities of employers/industries:
   a) Owning Skill Development activities.
   b) Identification of competencies and setting up of competency standards,
   c) Skill demand analysis and curriculum development.
   d) Facilitating training of trainers.
   e) Delivery of training, monitoring and evaluation.
   f) Participation in examination and certification.
   g) Participation in affiliation and accreditation process
   h) Sharing of work place experience, machinery and equipment.
   i) Support by way of physical, financial and human resources.
   j) Facilitating employment of trained graduates.
                                                                                 Page 12
   k) Supporting skill development initiatives of other public and private agencies.
   l) Implementing apprenticeship schemes.
   m) Investing in skill development activities.


2.3.3 Roles and responsibilities of trade unions:

   a) Assist in developing competency standards.
   b) Assist in course designing, examination and certification.
   c) Raising awareness about the benefit of training, skill development plans and
       activities among the workers
   d) Promote skill upgradation and lifelong learning among the workers.
   e) Running special skill development institutes for skill development of workers.
   f) Promoting investment on skill development among the employers.
   g) Facilitate improving status of VET trained graduates.

2.3.4 Roles and responsibilities of civil society organizations:
   a) Raising awareness about skill development plans and activities among the public.
   b) Facilitate improving status of VET trained graduates.
   c) Implementing skill development programmes of the Government.
   d) Assist in developing competency standards.
   e) Assist in course designing, examination and certification.
   f) Promote lifelong learning among the public.
   g) Promoting dignity of labour among the public.
   h) Sharing experience of learning with others.




                                                                               Page 13
                                       CHAPTER 3

                 EXPANSION OF OUTREACH, EQUITY AND ACCESS


3.0 The current capacity for skill development in the country is 3.1 million. India has set a
target of skilling 500 million people by 2022 to meet the challenges of India @ 75.


3.1    EXPANSION OF OUTREACH


       Skill Development Initiative needs considerable amount of expansion of capacity
       and innovative delivery approaches and Public Private Partnerships. A few of them
       are given below:


a)     Innovative approaches will be adopted to raise the capacity of the system
       extensively over a limited period.


b)      Incentive mechanisms will be developed to encourage the private sector to
       participate in skill development.



c)     The expansion of public training institutions will be promoted, particularly, in rural,
       border, hilly and difficult areas, where the private sector may find it difficult to
       invest.


d)     Innovative delivery models such decentralized delivery, mobile training, distance
       learning, e-learning and web-based learning will be used.


e)     Skill development centres at village and block level will be promoted to provide
       skill development opportunity as well as to act as one-stop kiosks with information

                                                                                 Page 14
      on the local labour market/employment, vocational learning opportunities and
      support schemes.


f)    Panchayats, municipalities and other local bodies will be involved in skill
      development and employment generation at the local level in collaboration with
      SHGs, cooperatives and NGOs.


g)    The coverage of vocations will be expanded.


h)    At present about 23,800 establishments are covered under the Apprenticeship
      Training Scheme imparting training to 2.58 lakh apprentices. Over the next five
      years, this will be increased to about 1 lakh establishments covering about 1 million
      apprentices. The existing Apprentices Act, 1961 will be revisited to meet desired
      target.


3.2   Equity and Access


a)    Equal access to skill development is essential for all social groups particularly
      women and disadvantaged section of society, to help them in securing decent
      employment and moving out of poverty.           Removing barriers to access and
      addressing their specific needs are key elements in achieving inclusive growth.


b)    Entry barriers such as educational qualification, transportation, loss of wages,
      language etc. will be addressed.       While enhancing the opportunity of skill
      development for all, entry assessments will be deployed to channelize people with
      different profiles and needs into appropriate skill development programmes.


c)    The effort will be combined with a major initiative in raising awareness among the
      target groups about the benefit of skill development, employment and learning
                                                                               Page 15
         opportunities and also about support schemes that enable them to participate in
         training.


d)       In addition to vocational skills, the provision of soft (or life) skills – including basic
         literacy, numeracy, occupational safety and health, hygiene, basic labour rights,
         team work and confidence building – will be made as an integral component of the
         curricula. This will also help in empowerment of vulnerable groups.


3.3      Vocational Training for Women


      Skill development for employability will be used as an agent of change in promoting
      women‟s employment. Women face a multitude of barriers in accessing skills and
      productive employment, remaining on the job due to effect of globalization or otherwise
      and advancing to higher level jobs, as well as returning to the labour market after a
      period of absence spent, for example, in raising children.


      a) A policy of non-discrimination will be pursued vigorously to provide equal access
         for women to skill development and employment.
      b) This Policy will aim to raise women‟s participation to at least 30% by the end of the
         11th Plan.
      c) Proactive measures that overcome barriers and facilitate participation, such as
         hostels for women, scholarships, transport, training materials and loans, will be
         made available on a large scale.
      d) The Women‟s Vocational Training Programme will be expanded and the
         institutional network providing training facilities exclusively for women, so that
         they can obtain skills with high wage and self-employment potential, will be greatly
         expanded.
      e) In order to promote skills and employability of women, the sectors which employ a
         large number of women will be identified. These may include construction, home-
                                                                                      Page 16
           based traditional crafts or piece rate work, financial and health service as well as
           agricultural sectors.
      f)   Gender stereotyping in vocational courses will be eliminated to encourage women‟s
           participation in non-traditional occupations, including existing and emerging
           technological fields.

3.4        Rural, Border, Hilly and Difficult Areas and Regional Imbalance in
Opportunities


      a) Infrastructure and programmes for skill development are particularly scarce in rural
           and difficult areas and thus the problem of access to training is most acute in these
           areas. Specially the women are increasingly the main workers in rural households,
           as their husbands migrate but often equipped with only traditional and outdated
           skills and knowledge.
      b) Skill development in rural areas contributes to improve productivity and working
           conditions in the agricultural sector while at the same time enabling rural workers,
           particularly young people, to access emerging employment opportunities beyond the
           agricultural sector.
      c) The outreach and quality of skill development in rural areas will be improved so as
           to enable rural workers to acquire and upgrade technologies; improve linkages to
           value chains; increase agricultural production; expand access to market and engage
           in off-farm activities which can generate supplemental income.
      d) In view of the limited training infrastructure, a range of infrastructure facilities,
           including schools, community centres and local government buildings, will be
           utilized as training venues. Institutes for entrepreneurship training such as Rural
           Development & Self-employment Training Institutes (RUDSETI) will be further
           promoted. The Government itself will set up public institutions and will also
           promote the establishment of private sector training institutions through a package
           of suitably designed incentives such as provision of land and financial assistance.

                                                                                    Page 17
   The convergence with national employment programmes, such as National Rural
   Employment Guaranteed Scheme (NREGS), will be promoted as an opportunity for
   imparting skills training in rural areas. Training facilities need to be updated
   regularly so as to meet changing demands.
e) Village- or block-based skill development centres will be set up to serve the needs
   of local communities. Facilitated by the district offices and panchayats, these skill
   development centres will play a pivotal role in identifying local employment
   opportunities and providing, or organizing, adequate training and post-training
   support according to the specific needs of local areas. The centres will also function
   as information centres for training and employment opportunities as well as various
   support schemes. These efforts will be combined with the creation of incentive
   mechanisms in motivating, particularly youth to participate in training and removal
   of other barriers in accessing training.
f) Various mobile training arrangements will be deployed to reach out to remote and
   difficult areas.
g) Skill development for self-employment will be an important component in these
   skill development efforts in rural areas. Post-training support, including mentoring
   for access to markets, credit and appropriate technologies, is an important part of
   skill development strategy for self-employment.
h) Training modules will incorporate specific needs of target groups, e.g. literacy, the
   level of education and the local language. The delivery of training will be flexible
   in terms of hours and duration to encourage participation, particularly among
   women.
i) In general, there is a regional imbalance in training opportunities and some parts of
   the country are quite deficient in skill development institutions. In order to provide
   more equitable access across the country, special efforts will be mounted to
   establish training facilities in deficient regions.



                                                                             Page 18
3.5 Disadvantaged Groups: Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward
      Classes


      a) The reservations applicable to these groups will be strictly enforced, with
         appropriate gender composition.
      b) Existing schemes for benefiting these groups will be reviewed, strengthened and
         made more effective.
      c) Efforts will be made to mobilize capabilities and expertise of civil society
         organizations.
      d) New innovative schemes and measures will also be devised to ensure full and
         effective participation by these groups, as well as the accrual of real benefits from
         skill development initiatives.




3.6      Minorities
      a) Skill development opportunities for minority groups will be expanded, particularly
         in Minority Concentrated Areas (MCAs).
      b) Existing schemes benefiting these groups will be reviewed, strengthened and made
         more effective.
      c) Efforts will be made to mobilize capabilities and expertise of civil society
         organizations.


      d) Formalization of non-formal skill acquisition and transfer will also be promoted in
         traditional art and craft sectors.


3.7      Persons with Disabilities




                                                                                  Page 19
  a) The current level of participation of persons with disabilities in skill programmes is
       very low, despite guidelines of reserving 3% of the seats for them. The guidelines
       apply only to the government sector.


  b) People with varying degrees of physical and mental disabilities will be provided with
       appropriate adjustment training and skills training to bring them in the economic
       mainstream and make them productive citizens.


  c) This Policy aims to expand the facilities for people with disabilities and to provide
       reasonable accommodation that enables them to access the facilities through suitable
       transport and building designs.
  d) The number of Vocational Rehabilitation Centres will be doubled in the 11th Plan and
       expanded further in subsequent Plans. Similar efforts will also be made at the State
       level to improve access and outreach.


  e) Training will be integrated with efforts to secure appropriate employment
       opportunities. Programmes of public awareness and community participation will be
       strengthened to promote demand for vocational training by people with disabilities as
       well as to facilitate their inclusion in the labour market.


3.8      The School Drop-Outs and Child labour


      a) School education would be strengthened to reduce the school drop outs. The quality
         of school education will influence the effectiveness of skill development programme
         as a whole. This will lay solid foundation for young people to acquire employable
         skills and engage in continuous skill upgradation throughout their working life.
      b) School education will be used as a tool to increase vocational awareness among the
         young people.


                                                                                  Page 20
   c) School drop-outs(leaving the schools before completing XII standard), child labour
      and out-of-school youth need to be given alternative education coupled with skill
      development opportunities to bring them into the economic and social mainstream.
   d) Short term, market oriented, demand-driven programmes will provide a flexible
      delivery framework suited to the characteristics and circumstances of the target
      group.
   e) Multi-skilling, multi-entry and exit, and linkages to skill upgradation opportunities
      in the future, will characterize such programmes. The scheme of Modular
      Employable Skills (i.e. short-term employable skills) will be expanded greatly to
      cater to the large size of the group.
   f) Formal educational requirements in accessing training will be reviewed in order to
      facilitate easy access.



3.9 Economically Challenged: Persons below Poverty Line

      a) Skill development for employability is an important strategy in the fight against
         poverty. Accordingly, the poor will have a priority claim and easy access to
         opportunities for skill development.


      b) This Policy aims at mitigating the impact of these economic barriers at different
         stages, as well as actively promote access of the poor to educational and skill
         development opportunities through specially designed schemes and measures.
         Such measures as special coaching for competing in admission tests, provision of
         non-formal skill development opportunities and the expanded provision of
         scholarships, books and soft-loans will be developed and implemented.




                                                                               Page 21
c) Efforts will be made to better integrate skill development into broader poverty
  reduction programmes and to strengthen the existing skill development
  components of such programmes.




                                                                      Page 22
                                          CHAPTER 4

                                     QUALITY AND RELEVANCE
4.0        Quality and relevance of skill development are key to India‟s global
competitiveness as well as improving an individual‟s access to decent employment. For
enterprises to compete in the global economy, the quality of training must reach world
standards and be relevant to the needs of national and international markets.

4.0.1 To increase the relevance with future employment market including promotion of
self employment, soft skills and entrepreneurship skills will be made integral part of skill
development.


4.0.2 The demographic advantage that the country enjoys, coupled with prospects of global
shortages in skills as the world population ages, means that the country could be supplying
skills to the world.


4.1 Quality Assurance is based on five key functions:
      a)     Validation of Qualifications for ensuring that qualifications reflect market needs
             and workplace requirements and are expressed in the form of competencies with
             clear assessment criteria;
      b)      Validation of Training Process for ensuring that proper tools, techniques,
             methodologies and material, as suggested in the curriculum/standards are used by
             the resource persons;
      c)      Quality Assured Assessment of Learners for ensuring that assessment is based
             on national standards (competencies) and uses valid and reliable assessment
             methods;
      d)     Accreditation of Training Providers and Training Institutions for ensuring that
             training is delivered by competent and qualified trainers in well-resourced and
             managed institutions;

                                                                                   Page 23
       e)       Research and Information for linking the supply of skilled workers to trends in
              well-researched Labour Market Information (LMI) covering both the organised
              and unorganised sectors of the economy.


The objective of enforcing quality and relevance in skill development will be realized
through improving infrastructure, improving quality of trainer and developing National
Vocational Qualification Framework.

4.2         Quality of infrastructure:
a)          Extensive use of Information & Communication Technology will be promoted for
            learning or increasing the impact of learning.
b)          Optimum use of existing physical infrastructure will be ensured in multiple shifts or
            otherwise.
c)          Industries will be encouraged to provide their spare capacity to supplement skill
            development activities.
d)          Physical infrastructure will be created, expanded and upgraded according to skill
            requirement of specific sectors of economy.

4.3         Quality of trainer:


a) Innovative ways of recruiting trainers will be adopted including the employment of
      former trainees who have gained workplace experience and of practitioners of a craft,
      trained as master craft persons.
b) Innovative skill development schemes, in which trainees acquire theoretical learning at
      the institution while obtaining practical skills in the workplace, will be devised.
c) Retired employees mainly from defence forces will be retrained to meet the requirement
      of trainers.
d) Award and incentive mechanisms, including reward and career progression systems,
      will be reviewed and institutionalized to improve the status of trainers.


                                                                                      Page 24
e) A system of granting Accredited Trainer Status for a limited period, to all vocational
      trainers of programmes, leading to National Vocational Qualifications will be
      developed.
f) Special efforts will be made to improve the gender balance among trainers.


4.4      National Vocational Qualifications Framework
To stimulate and support reforms in skills development and to facilitate nationally
standardised and acceptable, international comparability of qualifications, a “National
Vocational Qualifications Framework” will be established.                   All the existing
Institutions/Councils/Boards under different Ministries, involved in skill development will
be encouraged to follow National Vocational Qualification Framework.

This framework will have the following features:
      a) Competency based qualifications and certification on the basis of nationally agreed
          standards and criteria;
      b) Certification for learning achievement and qualification;
      c) A range of national qualification levels – based on criteria with respect to
          responsibility, complexity of activities, and transferability of competencies;
      d) The avoidance of duplication and overlapping of qualifications while assuring the
          inclusion of all training needs;
      e) Modular character where achievement can be made in small steps and accumulated
          for gaining recognizable qualification;
      f) Quality Assurance regime that would promote the portability of skills and labour
          market mobility;
      g) Lifelong learning through an improved skill recognition system; recognition of
          prior learning whether in formal, non-formal or informal arrangements;
      h) Open and flexible system which will permit competent individuals to accumulate
          their knowledge and skill through testing & certification into higher diploma and
          degree;

                                                                                    Page 25
      i) Different learning pathways – academic and vocational – that integrate formal and
          non-formal learning, notably learning in the workplace, and that offer vertical
          mobility from vocational to academic learning;
      j) Guidance for individuals in their choice of training and career planning;
      k) Comparability of general educational and vocational qualifications at appropriate
          levels;
      l) Nationally agreed framework of affiliation and accreditation of institutions.
      m) Multiple certification agencies/institutions will be encouraged within NVQF.

4.5      Labour Market Information Systems and HR Planning Mechanisms

      a) Improving the relevance and reducing skill mismatch of skill development requires
         establishment of Labour Market Information System (LMIS) and Human Resource
         Planning (HRP) for the reliable and realistic assessment of economic trends and
         labour market needs.
      b) Sector specific LMIS will be established at national and state levels, and area
         specific ones at local levels with the help of Sector Skill Councils (under National
         Skill Development Corporation) to undertake labour market analysis.
      c) Human Resource Planning exercises will be undertaken to gauge the anticipated
         supply and demand of skilled workers by different skill levels, economic sectors and
         geographical areas, over different periods.
      d) The information so generated by the LMIS and HRP exercises will be collated and
         disseminated widely to government, employers, training providers, trainees and
         prospective trainees at national, state and local levels, to enable them to take
         appropriate decisions.
      e) NCVT will be responsible for dissemination of information at the national level
         with inputs from SSCs and State Governments.
      f) Employment Exchanges will be strengthened and upgraded under the National
         Employment Service to provide counselling, guidance and placement services to the

                                                                                     Page 26
employment seekers.      They will also channel the candidates into jobs,
apprenticeship and training. Efforts will be made to expand formal employment.




                                                                      Page 27
                                        CHAPTER 5

             SKILL DEVELOPMENT FOR THE UNORGANISED SECTOR


5.0 Approximately 93 per cent of the country‟s workforce is in the unorganized sector. The
sector cuts across all economic activities and includes rural and urban areas. It contributes
to about 60 per cent of the country‟s GDP. Strengthening the skill base of the unorganized
sector will improve productivity, working conditions, labour rights, social security and
living standards.

5.0.1 Separate institutional mechanism will be explored which will interalia plan,
implement and monitor the skill development efforts for the unorganised sector.

5.0.2 The mode of informal apprenticeship and learning will be recognized and
accommodated in the NVQF to help in horizontal and vertical mobility.

5.1      Target Groups

The target groups in the unorganized sector include own-account workers, workers and
apprentices in micro enterprises; unpaid family workers; casual labourers; home-based
workers; peripatetic workers and migrant labourers; out of school youth and adults in need
of skills; farmers and artisans in rural areas, among others. In order to encourage
participation in skill development, entry barriers such as educational qualification,
transportation, loss of wages, problem of language, etc. will be suitably addressed.




5.2      Training Providers
a) Various avenues / institutions including schools and public/ private training
      institutions/civil society organizations/NGOs etc. will be encouraged to conduct skill
      development programmes for the unorganised sector.


                                                                                  Page 28
b) Mobile training vans will also be deployed in rural and remote areas where training
      infrastructure is awfully deficient.
c) Skill development centres will conduct skill development programmes primarily to
      support services and unorganised sector.
d) Public training institutions will be given greater managerial and academic autonomy to
      design and offer programmes that meet the requirements of local economy and specific
      target groups.
e) Flexible delivery strategy and patterns that suit the needs of the target groups, such as
      part/full time and on/off site training, will be adopted.
f) Training will be predominantly short-term to encourage participation.
g) Arrangements will be made for the testing and certification of skills acquired in non-
      formal and informal arrangements. These certificates will be integrated with NVQF.


5.3      Informal Apprenticeship


a) Skill development programmes will be devised in existing / traditional skills and
      knowledge. Mechanisms will be evolved to upgrade them into modern skill areas.


b) Skills of local trainers will be upgraded in modern techniques, technologies and
      pedagogy. They will be trained and developed into master craftsmen. Opportunities for
      linking these arrangements to formal training institutions will be explored to extend
      expertise, pedagogical support and tools & equipment.
c) Dual-type apprenticeships will be encouraged.

d) Social protection mechanism for apprentices will be devised. Special efforts will be
      made to eliminate child labour, to improve access for girls, people with disabilities and
      other vulnerable groups.




                                                                                   Page 29
5.4      Literacy and Soft Skills

Skill development initiatives for the unorganized sector will include a definite component
on literacy , basic education and soft skills .

5.5      Skill Development for Self-Employment

a) The focus will be given to entrepreneurship skill development for the unorganized
      sector.

b) Institutes for entrepreneurship development, technology incubation centres and other
      such institutional arrangements will be utilized to support successful adoption of
      entrepreneurship of unorganized sector workers.

5.6      Lifelong Learning and Recognition of Prior Learning

a) Competency standards and certification systems will be developed for unorganized
      sector work and incorporated in the national testing and certification system.

b) Mechanisms will be developed for vocational counselling and career guidance;

c) Information regarding employment trends and training opportunities will also be
      provided to motivate young people and workers to acquire and continuously upgrade
      their skills and knowledge.




5.7      Replication of Successful Models

Various successful models have been tried in India and around the world. In designing skill
development strategies and programmes for the unorganised sector, successful models will
be studied and adopted to suit local conditions.




                                                                                       Page 30
                                       CHAPTER 6


 BENCHMARKING OF SKILL DEFICIT AND PLAN TO ACHIEVE TARGET BY
                                            2022


6.0 According to the 2007-08 Economic Survey, 64.8% of India‟s population would be in
the working age of 15-64 years in 2026 up from 62.9% in 2006. Other projections also
indicate emergence of young India with 800 million in the productive age group by 2015
compared to 600 million in China.
6.0.1 According to a study conducted by Confederation of Indian Industry and Boston
Consulting Group (CII & BCG) India has a large population base of 1.14 billion with
demographic shift in favor of working age group (15-59 years) while the overall population
is projected to grow at 1.4% over the next five years the working age is expected to grow at
2.15%. If the present trend continues, 109 million persons will attain working age during
the period of 2007-2012. The net addition to workforce is, therefore, expected to grow to 89
million of which around 13 million are likely to be graduates/post graduates and about 57
million are likely to be school drop outs or illiterates. A significant share of incremental
demand is likely to be for skilled labour – graduates and vocationally trained people are
expected to account for 23% of incremental demand by 2012. The study further estimates
that India is likely to increase deficit of 5.25 million employable graduates and vocationally
trained workforce by 2012.
6.0.2 Another study by Boston Consulting Group for PHD Chamber of Commerce &
Industry has estimated that by 2020 the world will have shortage of 47 million working
people but India will have a surplus of 56 million people. In order to reap the benefits of
demographic dividend India will have to, therefore, equip this manpower to meet the
requirement of skill talent across geographies.




6.1    CII has conducted study in select sectors of economy in following States:-
                                                                                  Page 31
Punjab – Textiles, Auto/Auto Components, Light Engineering, Food Processing, Real
Estate and Construction, Retail and Location based entertainment.


Tamil Nadu – Textiles, construction, auto/auto components, Light Engineering, IT/ITES,
Leather.


Andhra Pradesh – Construction, Textiles, Tourism, Healthcare, Engineering, IT/ITES,
Pharma, Biotech, Paper, Minerals.


J&K – Handicrafts, Hospitality, Agro-processing, Construction, ITES, Repair Servicing.

On the basis of above study CII has projected the following requirement of skilled workers
at different levels by 2015:-



S.No       Sector                Demand (in      Skill Level Break-up
                                    Mn)
1          Auto                    2-2.5         Specialised skills – 5%
                                                 Skill category level II – 25%
                                                 Skill category level I – 30%
                                                 Minimal education skillable – 40%
2          Construction               15         Specialised skills – 2%
                                                 Skill category level II – 11%
                                                 Skill category level I – 12%
                                                 Minimal education skillable – 75%
3          Retail                     4-5        Specialised skills – 6-8%
                                                 Skill category level II – 32-43%
                                                 Skill category level I – 45-50%
                                                 Minimal education skillable – 10-15%
4          Healthcare                4-4.5       Specialised skills – 10%
                                                 Skill category level II – 40%
                                                 Skill category level I – 16%
                                                 Minimal education skillable – 34%
5          Banking & Financial       4.5-5       Specialised skills – 5%
           services                              Skill category level II – 15%
                                                 Skill category level I – 65%
                                                                              Page 32
                                                Minimal education skillable – 15%
6         Creative Industry         0.5 - 0.8   Specialised skills – 5%
                                                Skill category level II – 20%
                                                Skill category level I – 65%
                                                Minimal education skillable – 10%
7         Logistics               Drivers:51    Warehouse Managers: 8000
                                  Mn

          Total                   81-83.8Mn

6.2      CII has further projected Incremental Human Resource Requirement till: 2022

              Sectors               Incremental Human Resources Requirement

        Mines and Minerals                           1,754,881
           Construction                             55,199,568
           Engineering                               1,813,790

       Banking and Insurance                         3,947,139
         Drugs and Pharma                            1,383,721

              Biotech                                1,209,489

             Healthcare                             20,684,530
              Textiles                              86,545,390

            IT and ITeS                             14,806,299
              Tourism                               12,478,386
      Agro and Food Processing                       169,782
               Paper                                  57,976

      Chemicals and Fertilizers                      1,391,948

               Total                               201,442,899


Hence total requirement of skilled work force by 2022 will be about 300Mn.




                                                                             Page 33
    6.3  SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND TRAINING PROGRAMMES UNDER VARIOUS
    MINISTRIES/ DEPARTMENTS


Sl.       Ministry/     Schemes/         Programmes/       Target Group              Duration      of
No.       Department    Institutions having provision                                Training (long-
                        for Vocational Education and                                 term / Short-
                        Training programme                                           term)
1         Agriculture   Training     in     Agricultural   Person     engaged     in Short      term
                        Extension (21 training centres),   Agricultural institutions courses
                        Training in use of Agricultural    and support services,
                        Implements & machinery, Soil       members of cooperatives
                        Conservation Training Centre,      and Farmers. Under KVK,
                        LFQC&TI, NPPTI, Cooperative        550/589     districts are
                        Education and Training.            covered.

                        Under the University stream,       Students            with U.G. courses – 4
                        various under-graduate, post-      Qualifications as usual  years,       P.G.
                        graduate and Ph.D. courses are     under University stream  courses – 2 years
                        offered (DARE).                    of education.            and Ph.D. as
                                                                                    usual.
                        There     is    one     Central Students               with As usual.
                        Agricultural University, thirty- Qualifications as usual.
                        one      State     Agricultural
                        Universities (SAUs) and four
                        National Institutes of Indian
                        Council      of    Agricultural
                        Research having the status of
                        Deemed University.

                        ICAR also arranges need based Individual scientists      or One week to
                        training programmes in any of groups of scientists.         three months (or
                        State Agricultural University or                            longer duration,
                        ICAR Institutes in new and                                  as fixed).
                        emerging areas.

                        CIFNET – Regular courses and 10th Standard students           6-18 months
                        special training courses

                        CIFNET – Refresher courses         Lecturers/in-service    4 weeks
2         Food          Grants were provided to NGOs       Persons living in rural
          Processing    for setting up of 326 Food         areas with preference
          Industries    Processing & Training Centres      being given to women,
                                                                                Page 34
Sl.   Ministry/       Schemes/         Programmes/ Target Group                Duration     of
No.   Department      Institutions having provision                            Training (long-
                      for Vocational Education and                             term / Short-
                      Training programme                                       term)
                      (FPTCs) during 1992-93 to SC, ST and other weaker
                      2000-01.                      sections of society

                      Institutions like Central Food Mainly persons in Food Short term
                      Technology Research Institute, Processing Industry
                      Paddy Processing Research
                      Centre, PHTC, Council of
                      Entrepreneurial Development
                      Programme (EDP) are also
                      running training courses.

                      Person power development in    Open                      Short term
                      rural areas (FBTC Scheme)

                      Entrepreneurship Development Open                        Short term
                      Programme

                     Programmes for development of Candidates aspiring to be
                     human resources in food Managers,             technician/ AICTE approved
                     processing, testing, training,
                                                    technologists,        and diploma/degree
                     quality management etc.                                   courses‟
                                                    entrepreneurs
                                                                               durations     as
                                                                               usual     (Long-
                                                                               term)
3     Health       & Basic Training of multipurpose -Educated youth with       12 to 18 months
      Family         health worker (Female & Male)   minimum 10th pass
      Welfare         478       ANM/      MPW(F)
                          Training Centres
                      28 HFWTC & 30 Basic
                          MPWA(M) Schools


                      Promotional training of Female -Persons working in       Short term
                      Health Assistant in 42 training Health & family
                      centres.     Training is also Welfare programme
                      provided      by     Safdarjung
                      Hospital, St. John Ambulance,
                      NTCP, NPCB, NMHP, NACP,
                      INC, CBHI, CLTRI, PWTRC,
                                                                           Page 35
Sl.   Ministry/    Schemes/         Programmes/     Target Group                Duration     of
No.   Department   Institutions having provision                                Training (long-
                   for Vocational Education and                                 term / Short-
                   Training programme                                           term)
                   ECH etc.
4     Heavy        Counselling, Retraining and      Workers who opt for Short                   term
      Industries & Redeployment of Rationalized     voluntary       retirement, courses
      Public       Workers of CPSEs (Formerly       rendered     surplus    or
      Enterprises  NRF)                             retrenched from CPSEs
5     Human        Vocationalisation of Secondary   Student having passed 10th 2 years
      Resource     Education                        class
      Development  (6800 schools covered)


                     Polytechnics      (1244)    + 10th pass                    3 years diploma
                     Institutions for diploma in
                     pharmacy       (415),    hotel
                     management (63), architecture
                     (25)

                     Community         Polytechnic Poorer sections of society (3 to 6 months)
                     Scheme                        in both rural and urban
                     (675 CPs)                     areas


                                                    Disadvantaged groups of Need Based
                     Jan Shikshan Sansthan
                                                    adults. Priority is given to (1- 4 weeks)
                                                    adult neo-literates/ semi-
                     (157 Vocational Training
                                                    literates, SC and ST,
                     Centres run by NGOs offering
                                                    women/girls, oppressed,
                     more than 250 courses)
                                                    migrants, slum/ pavement
                                                    dwellers and working
                                                    children

                                               Engineering and physical         (Designing
                     Support     For  Distance sciences               under-    course material –
                     Education & Web Based graduates/post graduates in          time       bound
                     Learning (NPTEL)          the        country;        all   project)
                                               teachers/faculties in science
                                               and engineering Universities
                                               in India


                                                    School leavers with 5th, 6 months to 2
                                                                        Page 36
Sl.   Ministry/     Schemes/         Programmes/ Target Group                  Duration     of
No.   Department    Institutions having provision                              Training (long-
                    for Vocational Education and                               term / Short-
                    Training programme                                         term)
                    National Institute of Open 7th,,8th and 10th pass          years
                    Schooling -Distance Vocational
                    Education Programmes
                    [Practical training through
                    Accredited Vocational Institutes
                    (AVIs)]

                    Apprenticeship Training for Students passing out of +2 One year
                    student of +2 Vocational stream Vocational stream

                    National    Programme      on Recognized engineering       Faculty
                    Earthquake        Engineering colleges/ polytechnics and   development
                    Education (NPEEE)             schools of architecture      through   short-
                                                  having related academic      term       crash
                                                  degree     or     diploma    programmes and
                                                  programme                    long-term
                                                                               programmes

6     Information   DOEACC - „O‟ level             Students    or   working Flexible duration
      Technology                                   persons with 10+2 pass   for       passing
                                                                            examination

                    CEDTI                          It conducts courses in the Short       term
                                                   field   of    Electronics, courses
                                                   Telecommunications, IT,
                                                   Process     Control     &
                                                   Instrumentation


7      Labour    & Craftsmen Training     Scheme School leavers with 8th, Six months to
      Employment   (CTS)                         10th and 12th pass       Three years
      (DGET)       (6834 ITI/ITCs)

                                                    School leavers with 8th, Six months to 4
                                                      th
                    Apprenticeship         Training 10 and 12th pass or years
                                                    National Trade Certificate
                    Scheme (ATS)
                                                    Holder
                    (23,800 establishments)
                                                   School   drop outs   and Short       term(60
                                                                         Page 37
Sl.   Ministry/     Schemes/         Programmes/ Target Group                   Duration        of
No.   Department    Institutions having provision                               Training (long-
                    for Vocational Education and                                term / Short-
                    Training programme                                          term)
                    Modular            Employable unorganized            sector hrs to 1000 hrs)
                    Skills(MES)                   workers


                    Crafts  Instructor     Training Instructors of ITIs/ITCs       1 year
                    Scheme (CITS) (6 Institutes)

                    Advanced Vocational Training Industrial          Workers/ Short         Term
                    Scheme and Hi-tech Training Technicians                   courses
                    Scheme (65 centres)

                    Supervisory     Training     (2 Supervisors from Industry      Long and short
                    institutes)                                                    term

                    Women Training Institutes(11 Women (School leavers, Long and short
                    institutes)                  Instructors and others) term

                    Central Staff Training     and Training Executives and Short Term
                    Research Institute             Principals

                    Model Training Institutes and School leavers with 8th, One to           Three
                    Model       Industrial Training 10th and 12th pass     years
                    Institutes.
8     Rural         National Institute of Rural Practicising Manager in Short                term
      Development   Development (NIRD) Conducts rural development       Courses
                    about 150 programmes

                    Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Focus is on the vulnerable Need based short
                    Yojana (SGSY)               groups among the rural term
                                                poor.    SC/ STs would
                                                account for a minimum of
                                                50%, women for 20% and
                                                disabled for 3% of the
                                                total swarozgaris during a
                                                year.
                    RUDSETIS train about 1.25                              Short term
                    Lakh per annum

                                                                               Page 38
Sl.   Ministry/      Schemes/          Programmes/ Target Group                    Duration     of
No.   Department     Institutions having provision                                 Training (long-
                     for Vocational Education and                                  term / Short-
                     Training programme                                            term)
                     Skill development of BPL                                      Short term
                     @50000 per annum
9      MSME          Entrepreneurship Development  Workers                        Both short term
                     Programme, Skill Development                                  and long term
      [Small         Programme                 (SDP),  Educated unemployed
      Industries     Management         Development        youth
      Development    Programme
      Organisation    It has 72 institutes/ bodies.   Entrepreneurs
      (SIDO)]              SSSI – 30
                           Br. SSSI- 28
                           RTC – 4
                           Tool Rooms – 8
                           PPDC – 2
10    Khadi       & 51 Training Centres run 35 Unemployed rural youth,             2 months to 12
      Village        types of programmes              In-job                       months
      Industries                                      Artisans/Supervisors
      Commission                                      working in KVI instts,
      under Ministry                                  Prospective
      of MSME                                         Entrepreneurs,
                                                      Beneficiaries of different
                                                      Government.      Schemes
                                                      desirous of undertaking
                                                      KVI activities.

11    Social Justice National Institute of Mentally      Disadvantaged         and  Short term
      &              Handicapped, National Institute     marginalized sections of    training upto
      Empowerment for       the      Orthopaedically     the society viz., SC,       six months
                     Handicapped,     Institute for      Minorities, B.C., Persons   duration
                     Physically         Handicapped,     with disabilities, Aged
                     National Institute for the          Persons, Street children  Orientation
                     Hearing Handicapped, National       and victims of Drug         Programmes
                     Handicapped      Finance     and    Abuse etc.                  upto      one
                     Development         Corporation,                                week
                     National Scheme of Liberation                                   duration
                     and       Rehabilitation       of
                     Scavengers        and       their
                     Dependents,             National
                     Scheduled       Castes       and
                     Scheduled Tribes Finance and
                                                                              Page 39
Sl.   Ministry/         Schemes/         Programmes/       Target Group              Duration     of
No.   Department        Institutions having provision                                Training (long-
                        for Vocational Education and                                 term / Short-
                        Training programme                                           term)
                        Development        Corporation,
                        Rehabilitation Council of India
12    Textiles          Decentralized          Training    Skill    upgradation     of  Mainly short
                        Programme,      24    Weavers‟     Workers      in     textile   term (15 days
                        Service Centres, Cooperative       industry                      to 3 months).
                        Training, 13 Power loom
                        Centres, Indian Jute Industries                               Some courses
                        Research Association, Central                                  under
                        Wool Development Board,                                        Handicrafts
                        Central Silk Board, Training                                   are of 1 year
                        Centres for Handicrafts, North                                 duration.
                        –eastern     Handicrafts     and
                        Handlooms          development
                        Corporation

                      Apparel Export Promotion             Workers     in     Garment 3 months to 1
                      Council (AEPC)                       Industry                   year
13     Tourism        15 Food Craft Institutes under       10th Pass                  6 months – 1
                      State Governments                                               year
14     Tribal Affairs Vocational Training Centres          Unemployed Tribal youth 6 months in VTC
                      (VTC) in Tribal Areas.               (Each person is given and 6 months
                      (100% central assistance is          training in two trades)    with      master
                      given to State/ UT / NGO for                                    craftsmen
                      setting up VTs.
15     Urban          Urban      Self    Employment     Urban Unemployed or Short term
      Development     Programme       under  Swarna     underemployed         poor (2-6    months)
      &       Poverty Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana     below poverty line         subject      to
      alleviation     (SJSRY)                                                      minimum    300
                                                                                   hours
16    HUDCO        &    640   Building          Centres Persons    engaged      in Short     term
      others       in   (HUDCO)                         Construction Industry      courses
      Construction
                                                                                     Short       term
      sector under
                        Company run schools (NBCC                                    courses
      Ministry     of
      Urban             HCC, L&T, ECC etc.) &
                        association etc.
      Development                                    Worker&       Supervisor 1 month to
      &     Planning    Construction        Industry having qualification of 6 months
      Commission        Development Council (CIDC) Vth to XIIth Standard
                        & others
                                                                          Page 40
Sl.   Ministry/     Schemes/         Programmes/ Target Group                    Duration      of
No.   Department    Institutions having provision                                Training (long-
                    for Vocational Education and                                 term / Short-
                    Training programme                                           term)
17    Women       & Support to Training and To provide updated skills            Short      term
      Child         Employment Programme for and new knowledge to                courses
      Development   Women (STEP)                  poor and assetless women
                                                  traditional sectors
                     Swalamban          (previously To train poor women
                     NORAD)                         mostly in non-traditional
                                                    trades

                     Training in      home    scale   Housewives             and
                     preservation of fruits and       adolescent girls with a
                     vegetables,(by Community Food    view       to     promote
                     and Nutrition Extension Units                                Two weeks
                                                      preservation           and
                     (CFNEUs)                         consumption of fruits and
                                                      vegetables which provide
                                                      much               needed
                                                      micronutrients, as well as
                                                      to provide necessary skills
                                                      which could be useful for
                                                      income          generation
                                                      purposes.
                     Central Social Welfare Board To train women in
                     (programmes are organised by marketable trades and also
                     voluntary organisations)     to upgrade their skills for
                                                  getting      remunerative
                                                  employment opportunities
                     Women          Empowerment To organise women into
                     Programme in collaboration effective  Self  Help
                     with    IGNOU      (Training Groups
                     programme on “Empowering
                     women through SHG”)
                     Kishori Shakti Yojana            To train and equip
                                                      adolescent      girls to
                                                      improve home based and
                                                      vocational skills
                     Other   programmes        like
                     UDISHA,     Training        of                              Minimum      60
                                                                                 days
                                                                            Page 41
Sl.   Ministry/    Schemes/         Programmes/ Target Group       Duration     of
No.   Department   Institutions having provision                   Training (long-
                   for Vocational Education and                    term / Short-
                   Training programme                              term)
                   Anganwadi Workers, NIPCCB,
                   Rashtriya Mahila Kosh etc.




                                                               Page 42
6.4    There are certain sectors of economy where skill requirement is very high but none
of the Ministries is involved in skill development for example construction sector, IT
enabled services, consumer and retail sector, financial sector etc. The training activities in
the private sector are being carried out according to market demand but there is no
monitoring and planning at the level of the Ministry.          This policy would encourage
Ministries/Departments concerned to increase their involvement in skill development. They
may carry it out directly or through partner organizations.


6.5 PM‟s National Council on skill development has set a target of 500 million persons by
2022. Accordingly all the ministries will devise skill development plans and set the targets
for 11th,12th & 13th Five year plans and Planning commission would allocate necessary
resources to meet the above targets under plan schemes. Planning Commission would also
ensure that all the Ministries are making necessary provisions for skill development in their
annual plans and setting the targets/milestones for skill development and employment. All
the targets will be in the direction of achieving above objectives.


6.6   All the Ministries/Departments will add one annex in their annual report on “Skill
Development      and Employment generation”. Ministry of Labour and Employment will
develop necessary format for this purpose.


6.7 National Skill Development Corporation will also prepare a skill development plan to
meet the expectation of labour market including requirement of unorganized sector. The
Corporation will also submit annual report in specified format on skill development carried
out during the year.

6.8     Present number of training institutions, their annual capacity of training and
projected number of trained persons by 2022 for different Ministries/ Departments /

                                                                                  Page 43
Organizations is given below. The targets are based on projected employment potential in
the concerned sectors. This may, however, be reviewed from time to time according to
growth of sectors and their actual workforce requirement.
Sl/No Ministry    /    Department/      Present number of          Present     training    Projected   number   of
      Organisation                      institutions               capacity per annum      trained persons by 2022
                                                                   ( IN LAKH)              (IN LAKH)
1     National Skill Development                              --                      --                      1500
      Corporation
2      Labour & Employment                              33,000                    12 .00                      1000
3     Tourism                                               38                      0.17                        50
4     Textiles                                             277                      0.15                       100
5     Transport                                              1                      0.02                       300
6      Tribal Affairs                                       63                     0. 06
7      Rural          Development                          156                     5.48                        200
      (RUDSETI) and IL & FS
8     Women & Child Welfare                              68                       17.50                        100
9     Agriculture                                        72                       19.81                        200
10     HRD Higher Education             10,000(Voc. schls)                        19.60                        500
      HRD Vocational Education          (Engg. Coll. 2297                         14.00
                                        Polytechnics 1675)
11    Dept of Heavy Industry                               *                          *                        100
12    Urban Development                                  34                       0.013                        150
13    Department of Information         1000         (Affiliated                   1.37                        100
      Technology                        centres) + 7 CDAC
14    Food Processing Industries                            34                     0.10                         50
15    Construction           Industry                      147                     4.64                        200
      Development Council (under
      Planning Commission )
16    Health & Family Welfare                             3802                     1.35                        100
17    Micro        Small    Medium                         356                     2.92                        150
      Enterprise
18    Social Justice & Empowerment      Through NGOs &                                                          50
                                        others
19    Overseas Indian Affairs           In    partnership with                     0.13                         50
                                        MSME/stateGovernment/
                                        CII/ NGO etc.
20    Finance-Insurance/Banking                              *                                                 100
22    Consumer Affairs                                       *                                                 100
23    Chemicals & Fertilizers                                6                     0.19                         50
24    Others (Power, Petroleum etc.)                      NA                                                   150
                                                         Total                    99.46                       5300
                                                                                                    i.e. 53 crore
* At present these Ministries are not directly involved in pre-employment training activities.




                                                                                               Page 44
                                       CHAPTER 7

                        FINANCING SKILL DEVELOPMENT


7.1    Skill development brings return to the individual, the employing enterprise and the
economy as a whole. Therefore, all stakeholders, the Government both at Centre and States,
the enterprise – public and private, and the direct beneficiary – the individual, would share
the burden of mobilizing financial or in-kind resources for skill development.


7.2    To fulfil the mandate envisaged in this policy apart from adequate central outlay, the
Planning Commission will also provide a specific budgetary provision for skill
development in the State plans. In addition, private sector investment in skill development
will be encouraged through innovative methods.


7.3    A National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) has been established with
Central Government commitment of Rs. 1,000 crore. Rs. 15,000 crore is envisaged to be
generated    from other Governments, public sector entities, private sector, bilateral and
multilateral sources.




                                                                                 Page 45
                                        CHAPTER 8

                            RESPONDING TO THE FUTURE
8.1      Globalisation Driven by Technology and the Emerging Knowledge Economy


Occupational patterns are changing; new jobs and job titles, job enlargement, job
enrichment, and new flexible work arrangements are emerging. Employment demands are
shifting towards higher skill categories.


8.1.1 It is imperative, therefore, for India to move up the skill-ladder and produce a larger
number of people with higher education and generic training for new types of knowledge
work, both in high skill services and high technology industrial production.


Knowledge professionals will need support from middle-skilled workers in new knowledge
and technology areas. The skill development system will need to meet this challenge. The
response time is limited as the rate of change is high and accelerating.

8.2      Promoting Excellence

To promote excellence, a significant number of well performing institutions will be assisted
to develop into institutions of excellence. These institutions will be generously resourced,
equipped with internationally comparable facilities and high quality faculty and able to
offer high quality programmes in current and emerging technology areas. These institutions
will be networked with a number of training institutions in their vicinity and serve as lead
institutions in supporting their development.



8.3      Experimentation, Innovation and Research

a) Policy encourages the creation of a National Skill Development Initiative that is highly
      dynamic and nimble-footed. This will always be extrapolating the future requirements.
                                                                                Page 46
      It will have to be constantly responsive to changes in the immediate as well as global
      environments, learn from them, and experiment with new approaches and structures. A
      culture of innovation will drive the future system.
b) Research will be a key strategy for managing change and benefiting from it. Since
      experimentation and innovation flourishes in a vibrant and self-confident environment,
      flexibility and operational autonomy will be extended to deserving institutions.

c) Research in international developments and in organizational practices and pedagogical
      approaches will be an on-going activity. Standing institutional arrangements will be
      established for the purpose and research will be funded both in these arrangements and
      in outside research institutions.


8.4      Policy Review


       8.4.1     Skill development is placed in a highly dynamic environment and thus it is
       imperative that this Policy undergoes a periodic review and target revision to maintain
       its relevance.


       8.4.2     The National Policy on Skill Development will be reviewed every five years
       and revised appropriately to take account of progress in implementation and emerging
       trends in the national and international environment. Research and the promotion of
       good practices are vital activities that will enable this Policy and the Skill
       Development Initiative to meet emerging needs. The implementation of the Policy will
       be continuously monitored to provide the basis for review.
                                                                                     Annex-II
                                                                             (Para 7, Page 10)

Outcomes of Skills Development Policy:
      a) Demand driven system guided by labour market signals thereby reducing skills
         mismatch: Labour Market Information and Human Resource Planning

                                                                                   Page 47
b) Expansion of outreach using established as well as innovative approaches.
c) National Vocational Qualifications Framework which will interalia include
   opportunities for horizontal and vertical mobility between general and technical
   education, Recognition and certification of competencies irrespective of mode of
   learning.
d) System to deliver „competencies‟ in line with nationally and internationally
   recognised standards.
e) Focus on new emerging occupations
f) Life long learning- focus both on pre-service and in – service training
g) Equity consideration - adequate participation of women, disabled persons and
   disadvantaged groups including economically backward & minorities- enhancing
   their access to training; improving employability and increasing employment
   opportunities
h) Stress on research, planning and monitoring
i) Involvement of social partners- responsibility for management and financing of the
   system would be shared with all stakeholders and provide greater space for Public
   Private Partnership.
j) Promoting excellence
k) Use of modern training technologies including distance learning, e-learning, web
   based learning etc.
    l) Skill upgradation of trainers, their quality assurance, and improvement of status.




                                                                             Page 48
